Headings Introduced
-------------------
Headings Introduced
===================

Texinfo provides standard page heading formats for manuals that are
printed on one side of each sheet of paper and for manuals that are
printed on both sides of the paper.  Typically, you will use these
formats, but you can specify your own format if you wish.

In addition, you can specify whether chapters should begin on a new
page, or merely continue the same page as the previous chapter; and if
chapters begin on new pages, you can specify whether they must be
odd-numbered pages.

By convention, a book is printed on both sides of each sheet of paper.
When you open a book, the right-hand page is odd-numbered, and
chapters begin on right-hand pages--a preceding left-hand page is
left blank if necessary.  Reports, however, are often printed on just
one side of paper, and chapters begin on a fresh page immediately
following the end of the preceding chapter.  In short or informal
reports, chapters often do not begin on a new page at all, but are
separated from the preceding text by a small amount of whitespace.

The @setchapternewpage command controls whether chapters begin
on new pages, and whether one of the standard heading formats is used.
In addition, Texinfo has several heading and footing commands that you
can use to generate your own heading and footing formats.

In Texinfo, headings and footings are single lines at the tops and
bottoms of pages; you cannot create multiline headings or footings.
Each header or footer line is divided into three parts: a left part, a
middle part, and a right part.  Any part, or a whole line, may be left
blank.  Text for the left part of a header or footer line is set
flushleft; text for the middle part is centered; and, text for the
right part is set flushright.

